---
layout: post
title:  "You don't have to ask developers to install Bower and Grunt to start your app"
date:   2014-12-18 00:28:39
tags: [js, node]
---

It's very common in font-end applications to have [Bower](http://bower.io/) dependencies and use [Grunt](http://gruntjs.com/) (or [Gulp](http://gulpjs.com/)) for their build system. Usually in README document it's stated that you need to install Bower and Grunt globally before you can start the project.

{% highlight sh %}
npm install -g bower grunt-cli
git clone git://myapp.git
cd my app
npm install
bower install
grunt serve
{% endhighlight %}

In [Swagger Editor](https://github.com/swagger-api/swagger-editor) project, I made this process as simple as `git clone` and then `npm start`.

{% highlight sh %}
git clone git@github.com:swagger-api/swagger-editor.git
cd swagger-editor
npm start
{% endhighlight %}

No need for installing Bower or Grunt. It also works in Windows.

### npm scripts to rescue!

With [npm scripts](https://docs.npmjs.com/misc/scripts) we can remove dependencies to global installation of Bower and Grunt and also install npm and Bower packages automatically. First of all we need to install Bower and Grunt as developer dependencies of our app.

{% highlight sh %}
npm install --save-dev bower grunt-cli
{% endhighlight %}

Now, using npm scripts fields we can define `start` script to trigger `npm install`, `bower install` and then `grunt serve`.

{% highlight javascript %}
"scripts": {
  "start": "npm install; bower install; grunt; grunt serve"
}
{% endhighlight %}

Now, `git clone` and then `npm start` will do everything you need. This will work perfectly in Linux, OS X and Windows because `"start"` is simply a Bash script that uses `./node_moduels/.bin` as `$PATH`. So even if user don't have Gulp installed globally, `gulp` command in your npm script will execute `gulp` binary in `./node_modules/.bin`.

*Pro tip:* If you name your script, `server.js` you don't even have to have a `start` field in  `scritps` of your `package.json`, npm will automatically run `node server.js` for `npm start` command
